11 LibPros scholars
Date:       2016-11-27
Publisher:  Philippine Daily Inquirer (Inquirer Opinion)
Source:     https://opinion.inquirer.net/99561/11-libpros-scholars

By: Artemio V. Panganiban | 12:08 AM November 27, 2016
Only 10 were to be chosen. But after a thorough evaluation of the candidates, the board of judges, led by Chief Justice Maria Lourdes P. A. Sereno, was so impressed that it recommended 11. The Foundation for Liberty and Prosperity (FLP) happily agreed.
Awarding ceremonies. And so, this Thursday, Dec. 1, the first batch of 11 “LibPros” law scholars will formally be awarded full scholarships (tuition, books and monthly stipend for a maximum of P200,000 each) at the new University of the Philippines (UP) campus in Fort Bonifacio, Taguig, with CJ Sereno as guest speaker. Every school year, 10 more scholars shall be selected.
Ateneo de Manila (Admu), Far Eastern University (FEU-Makati), San Beda College (SBC) and the University of Santo Tomas (UST) have two scholars each, while the Polytechnic University of the Philippines (PUP), University of San Carlos (USC) and UP have one each.
They are Sean James Borja (Admu), Kaycelle Anne Castillo (FEU), Ervin Frederick Dy (UP), Rexlyn Ann Evora (PUP), Ken Kevin Ganchero (FEU), Jose Noel Hilario (UST), Violeta Najarro Jr. (SBC-Alabang), Dion Ceasar Pascua (SBC-Manila), Ma Janine Pedernal (UST), Tess Marie Tan (USC) and Vanessa Gloria Vergara (Admu).
The LibPros scholarship program is cosponsored by the Tan Yan Kee Foundation (TYKF) in cooperation with the Philippine Association of Law Schools (PALS). Aside from Sereno, the board of judges was composed of FLP president Evelyn T. Dumdum, former education secretary Edilberto C. de Jesus, TYKF legal counsel Ma Cecilia L. Pesayco, and PALS president Ma Soledad D. Mawis, with FLP executive director Martin Angelo L. Esguerra, assisting.
FLP goals. To qualify, applicants must: 1) be third year law students in an eligible school, 2) belong to the top 10 percent of their class, 3) have an average of at least 83 percent (or 2.25) for the four prior semesters, 4) have full loads with no subject dropped, 5) submit a written commendation of their dean, 6) write an essay on liberty and prosperity, and 7) pass the screening of the board of judges.
The FLP was organized in December 2011 during my 75th birthday to perpetuate the legal philosophy of safeguarding the liberty and nurturing the prosperity of our people under the rule of law.
It believes that justice and jobs, freedom and food, ethics and economics, democracy and development, nay, liberty and prosperity must always go together; one is useless without the other. The attainment of this dual goal necessitates a keen understanding and appreciation of the intertwining relationship of law and business, and of regulation and entrepreneurship.
Other FLP activities. Apart from the LibPros scholarships, the FLP—together with the Ayala Group—is also sponsoring a dissertation contest. Prizes include P300,000 for the champion, P200,000 for the runner-up, P100,000 each for three honorable mentions, plus P20,000 each for 20 qualifying entries.
This contest is open to law students nationwide, unlike the scholarship program which is limited to qualified applicants from eligible law schools that are listed in the FLP website, www.libpros.com.
With the Metrobank Foundation and the Metro Pacific Investment Corp. (MPIC) as cosponsors, the FLP has also created 10 professorial chairs. Nine are now held by the law deans of Admu, FEU, USC, UP, UST, De La Salle University, Silliman University and the University of the Cordilleras plus the chancellor of the Philippine Judicial Academy. On Dec. 9, USC law dean Joan Largo will deliver her fourth professorial lecture in Cebu City.
The FLP acquired its head office in Makati with the assistance of First Philippine Holdings Corp., Lopez Holdings Corp., Meralco, PLDT, MPIC and San Miguel Corp. president Ramon S. Ang.
To clarify last Sunday’s column, each US state, by local law, determines how the electors are to be elected. In some, their names are on the ballot. In some others, the names of the presidential candidates themselves are on the ballot; however, the votes are still counted for the electors, not for the presidential candidates directly.