MARAMING SALAMAT PO

Date:       2006-12-06

Publisher:  cjpanganiban.com

Source:     https://cjpanganiban.com/maraming-salamat-po/

Valedictory address delivered by Chief Justice Artemio V. Panganiban during the retirement ceremonies held in his honor on December 6, 2006, 4:30 p.m., at the Supreme Court Session Hall.

---

What does one do when he receives a blessing of enormous value? How does one behave when the heart is full, and words are inadequate? Indeed, what can I do after having been given the very rare chance to serve as our country's highest magistrate? What can I say upon ending this extraordinary opportunity to be remembered beyond my mortal life?

What else can I do but say, Maraming maraming salamat po to everyone who has made this miracle possible. Indeed, in this serene and majestic temple of justice of our country, I celebrate my fervent thanksgiving.

THANK YOU TO TWO PRESIDENTS

Let me say maraming salamat po to Her Excellency, President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo, for naming me as the 21st Chief Justice of the Philippines, the first in the 21st century, and for administering my oath of office on the 21st day of December 2005. Let it be on record that President Arroyo had not asked me to do anything in return for that momentous event.

Maraming salamat po to President Fidel Valdez Ramos for initiating me into the Supreme Court on a Double Ten, October 10, 1995. Though I owe my appointment to the Court solely and completely to him, let me add very quickly that he never spoke to me about any case or matter pending in the Court since then. Such is the gentleman that he is.

THANK YOU TO MY COLLEAGUES

Maraming salamat po to all my colleagues in the Supreme Court. By their own writings, opinions and decisions, as well as discussions during our sessions, they have helped me test and mold my own thoughts. I cherish my work in the Court, because I find our intellectual exchanges, both verbal and written, stimulating, challenging and sometimes humbling.

As the primus inter pares of the Panganiban Court, I am especially appreciative of the individual and collective efforts of my colleagues to help me attain my vow to lead a judiciary characterized by four Ins: independence, integrity, industry and intelligence; one that is morally courageous to resist influence, interference, indifference and insolence; and is impervious to what I call the plague of ships: kinship, relationship, friendship, and fellowship.

I am thankful for their wholehearted cooperation in continuing our Action Program for Judicial Reform (APJR), especially in focusing on what I refer to as the ACID problems that corrode justice in our country: limited access to justice by the poor, corruption, incompetence and delay in the delivery of quality judgments.

To my mind, the battle for the four Ins and against the four ACID problems should lead to the attainment of two loftier end goals: safeguarding the liberty and nurturing the prosperity of our people under the rule of law. That we have been successful in spreading this gospel of Liberty and Prosperity is exemplified not only by the decisions and actions of the Court, but also by the testimonials we received during the recent Global Forum on Liberty and Prosperity held on October 18-20, 2006.

THANK YOU TO MY TEACHERS

Maraming salamat po to all those who helped me in my education: Candaba Elementary School; Juan Luna Elementary School; Mapa High School; and most especially Far Eastern University, where I learned not only academic excellence and well-rounded education, but also student leadership and the rudiments of my Catholic faith.

Maraming salamat po to the many institutions of learning which granted me honorary doctoral degrees without my having to enroll and to sweat during examinations. Before these doctorates were conferred upon me, I was the only member of my immediate family who did not have a graduate degree. To my wife and children who all hold masteral or doctoral degrees from pedigreed universities here and abroad, I say, we are now equal.

THANK YOU TO MY SHEPHERDS

Maraming salamat po to the shepherds of my faith and to my spiritual mentors. Towering above them are Fr. Michael Nolan, now in the Great Beyond, who, as chaplain of Far Eastern University in the 1950s, introduced me to our Lord; to Fr. James Sheehy, his successor, who eventually baptized all of my five children.

But the one person outside of my immediate family who has had the longest and perhaps the deepest influence in my life, career and faith is Dr. Jovito R. Salonga. I met him some 50 years ago when he was my professor and dean at FEU. Since then up to the present, he has remained my lifetime guru and model of how to live a life worth living. His foremost teaching: while it is desirable to have some of the necessities that money can buy, we should never ever forget that it is far more important to aspire for the things that money cannot buy, like honor, dignity, ethics, character and excellence.

THANK YOU TO MY FAMILY

Maraming salamat po to my wife Leni, who has showered me with unconditional love, endless devotion, and constant faithfulness during our more than 45 years of married life. She is my anchor in the stormy seas of adversity and the wind beneath my wings during my flights of fantasy.

Thank you also to my five children — Len, Archie, Celine, Tet and Mabel — each of whom has achieved my impossible dream of graduate education in an eminent institution in the United States. And to my nine lovable, healthy and good-looking apos. To all of you, I dedicate my eleven books.

TO GOD BE THE GLORY

As I end my valedictory, let the choicest gratitude and praise be unto God Almighty who, despite my occasional shortcomings and failures, has been ever faithful to me in all my 70 years of temporary sojourn here on earth.

The Lord is my Shepherd. There is nothing I shall want. He has given me more than I deserve — a happy home, a healthy body, accomplished children over whom I no longer worry, a stable career, a chance to serve our people, an opportunity to be remembered longer than my own life. Other than fulfilling my role in the Court, I have no more earth-bound ambition. I live my life with only one consuming passion: on that inevitable day when I will finally knock at the pearly gates, my Lord and Master will open the door, spread his arms and say: Well done on your earthly sojourn. You have passed the test. Welcome home to my everlasting Kingdom!

To God be the glory!