HOW THE JUDICIARY CAN HELP THE ECONOMY

Date:       2012-11-29

Publisher:  cjpanganiban.com

Source:     https://cjpanganiban.com/how-the-judiciary-can-help-the-economy-2/

Address delivered by retired Chief Justice ARTEMIO V. PANGANIBAN during the 2012 ACCRA LAW-MAP BusinessLaw Forum held on November 29, 2012 at the Manila Golf Club, Makati City.

---

I thank my esteemed companero, Atty. Avelino V. Cruz, Chairman of the ACCRA Law Office, for inviting me to speak during this whole-day forum commemorating the 40th Anniversary of his venerable law firm.

After the EDSA people power revolution in 1986, President Corazon Aquino offered Ave a seat in the Supreme Court. However, he respectfully declined, preferring to remain in his job as then Deputy Prime Minister. Had he accepted President Cory Aquino's offer, he could have been Chief Justice a decade later. And there would have been no Chief Justice Hilario G. Davide Jr. and Chief Justice Artemio V. Panganiban. Indeed, in more ways than I can imagine, I owe Ave many things, not only for his generous words today but also for the rare chance to be the chief magistrate of this country.

I am glad to meet the members of the Management Association of the Philippines, especially BPI President and CEO Aurelio R. Montinola, whom I congratulate for having been just named MAP Management Man of the Year 2012. Having known Gigi for many years now, and being an independent director of BPI, I also know that the award is well deserved and, in fact, long overdue.

LIBERTY AND PROSPERITY UNDER THE RULE OF LAW

In inviting me here, Ave Cruz asked me to speak on the interdependence between law and the economy, and specifically to discuss landmark Supreme Court decisions affecting the economy and business. I am glad to do so because my own legal and judicial philosophy, liberty and prosperity under the rule of law, calls for a symbiotic calibration of the relationship of law and business, and of good governance and good economics.

I recall that to close my term as Chief Justice, I convened a Global Forum on Liberty and Prosperity on October 18-20, 2006. More than 300 jurists and lawyers from all over the world, including several chief justices, came. The Chief Justice of Canada, the Honorable Beverley McLachlin, so enjoyed her visit here that she and her husband stayed for three more days after the Forum. She said that my legal philosophy works best under the rule of law which she espouses as her own philosophy. Hence, I agreed to label my legal philosophy in its complete form as liberty and prosperity under the rule of law.

Ladies and gentlemen, amid the serious economic crisis engulfing the developed world, the Philippines has shown remarkable resilience. This year, our economy grew 6.3 percent in the first quarter, 5.9 percent in the second, and a fantastic 7.1 percent in the third, for an over-all 6.5 percent growth for the first nine months of the year, making the Philippines the best performer in the Asean Region and the second best in Asia, second only to China.

Nonetheless, the question frequently asked is how the judiciary can help the economy. My stock answer is that, in judging controversies involving the economy, the judiciary must defer as much as possible to the political branches of government, the President and Congress in collaboration with the private sector.

In my humble view, jurists and lawyers should not only safeguard the liberty of our people but must also nurture their prosperity under the rule of law. Thus, their objective should be two-fold: justice and jobs; freedom and food; ethics and economics; democracy and development. Liberty and prosperity must always go together; one is useless without the other.

During my term as a jurist, I tried to implement this legal philosophy by interpreting the Constitution and the laws in this manner: In litigations involving political and civil liberties, the scales of justice should weigh heavily against the government and in favor of the people, pursuant to the doctrine of strict scrutiny. However, in matters affecting the economy of the country and the prosperity of our people, courts, in the absence of grave abuse of discretion and a blatant violation of our Constitution, must defer to the Executive and Legislative branches of government, in accordance with the principle of deferential interpretation of laws and executive issuances.

GLOBALIZATION, DEREGULATION, PRIVATIZATION, LIBERALIZATION

Let me now discuss three landmark decisions. For many decades since World War II till the early 1990s, the protection of native goods and local services was the popular policy here and in many other countries. Later, however, nations became more interdependent, and protectionism became obsolete. The World Trade Organization was organized to tear down tariffs, duties, import quotas and other trade barriers.

Citing the provisions of our Constitution mandating economic nationalism, some minority senators challenged the constitutionality of the Senate ratification of the WTO Treaty. Using deferential interpretation in Tanada vs. Angara (May 2, 1997), the Supreme Court, in a decision I had the honor of authoring, unanimously upheld the ratification, ruling that while the Constitution has a bias in favor of Filipino goods, services, labor and enterprises, at the same time, it recognizes the need for business exchange with the rest of the world on the bases of equality and reciprocity, and limits the protection of Philippine enterprises only against foreign competition and trade practices that are unfair.

Exercising judicial restraint, the Court refused to pass upon the wisdom or viability of deregulation and globalization. It said: What the Senate did in ratifying the WTO Treaty was a valid exercise of its authority. As to whether such exercise was wise, beneficial or viable is outside the realm of judicial inquiry and review. That is a matter between the elected policy makers and the people.

CONSTITUTIONALITY OF THE MINING LAW

Let me now move to La Bugal-B'laan Tribal Association vs Ramos, involving the constitutionality of the Mining Law of 1995. The original decision of the Supreme Court issued on January 27, 2004, by vote of 8-5, struck down as unconstitutional the major provisions of the Mining Law, the IRR and the FTAA. However, on reconsideration, the Court on December 1, 2004 reversed itself by a more definitive vote of 10-4. It vigorously and fully upheld the constitutionality of the Mining Law, the IRR and the FTAA.

As the ponente or writer of that decision, I relied once more on my legal philosophy of deferring the political branches of government in resolving controversies affecting the economy. The Constitution should be read in broad, life-giving strokes. It should not be used to strangulate economic growth or to serve narrow, parochial interests. Rather, it should be construed to grant Congress and the President sufficient discretion and reasonable leeway to enable them to attract foreign investments and expertise, as well as to secure for our people and our posterity the blessings of prosperity and peace.

INTERPRETING THE 60-40 RULE IN PUBLIC UTILITIES

Finally, let me discuss a very recent decision, Gamboa vs Teves, promulgated by the Supreme Court on June 28, 2011. Section 11 of Article XII of the Constitution states that only Filipino citizens or corporations at least 60 percent of whose capital is owned by such citizens may operate a public utility such as a telephone company.

The Supreme Court disposed that the word capital in the cited Charter provision refers only to shares of stock entitled to vote in the election of directors and thus only to common shares, and not to the total outstanding capital stock including non-voting preferred shares. Hence, foreign investments in public utilities should be limited to only 40 percent of the voting shares.

The dissenters argued that capital should include not only the voting but also the preferred and all other shares because this was the interpretation given by the framers of the current and previous Constitutions since 1935. They further said that the Constitution already assures Filipino control of public utilities because, in electing directors, foreigners can use only 40 percent of the common shares they hold, and only Filipinos may be executive and managing officers of public utilities.

With due respect, I submit that the judiciary does not have the mandate, not to say the expertise, to decide on matters relating to the economy and prosperity, and must, as much as possible, defer to the officials elected by the people. As I said at the beginning, our economy has shown resilience. How our government handles this most recent Supreme Court Decision involving the interpretation of the 60-40 ownership structure will certainly affect our momentum of growth. My own position should be clear to everyone by this time: In matters affecting the prosperity of our people, the judiciary can help the economy by deferring to the political branches of the government and to the private business sector which is the recognized engine of growth in a regime of free enterprise.

Maraming salamat po.