THE BLESSINGS AND FOIBLES OF BEING 80

Date:       2016-12-20

Publisher:  cjpanganiban.com

Source:     https://cjpanganiban.com/the-blessings-and-foibles-of-being-80/

Closing Remarks delivered by retired Chief Justice ARTEMIO V. PANGANIBAN during the musicale, Ageless Passion, held on December 20, 2016 at the new Maybank Performing Arts Theater, 9th Avenue corner 26th Street, Bonifacio Global City, Taguig.

---

May I introduce my family who are at the first level of the theater: my wife Leni, our children Len and Alex Yaptangco, our only son Archie, Celine and Patrick Hannett, Tet and Noy Manalac and Mabel Reagan, and our wonderful grandchildren, the joy of my old age, Miguel, Rafa, Patricia, Katrina, Victoria, Alexandra, Andrea and Nicole.

Ladies and gentlemen, after that exhilarating, scintillating and stimulating musicale that merited your reverberating applause and standing ovation in this brand new Maybank Performing Arts Theater, mere words and platitudes are inadequate to express my appreciation and gratitude to all of you for honoring me with your presence.

Let me especially greet His Eminence, Luis Antonio Cardinal Tagle, the gentle Archbishop of Manila and Pope-in-waiting, for being so magnanimous in magnificently singing the Prayer of St. Francis as his invocation. I respectfully requested him to sing, not just to pray, his invocation. And he just did.

May I also single out His Excellency, President Fidel V. Ramos, accompanied tonight by his wife Ming, who plucked me from anonymity and conscripted me, though thoroughly unworthy, to the highest court of the land. A few days ago, he sent me his latest book titled 2030 One World, One Community, One Family, together with a letter greeting me with this roaring salutation, Dear Tiger Chief Justice Art. Allow me to quote a sentence in his sagacious letter: It is said that life begins at 40. Therefore, one who is fortunate enough to reach the age 80 may be said to be born again in the eyes of the Good Lord and his fellow men.

May I quickly reply that when I was 40, my favorite prayer was from Reinhold Niebuhr, who pleaded, Lord, grant me the courage to change the things I can, the serenity to accept the things I cannot change, and the wisdom to know the difference. Now at 80, my prayer is: Lord, grant me the senility to forget the people I never liked, the good fortune to run into the people I do, and the eyesight to tell the difference.

At 80, I recall with fondness the famous essay of Dr. Frank Laubach titled Life Begins at 80: Once you reach 80, everyone wants to carry your baggage and help you up the steps. If you forget your name, or an appointment, or your own telephone number, you only need to explain that you are 80. Being 80 is a lot better than being 70. So, please, folks, try to make it to 80. It is the best time of life. If you ask me, life begins at 80.

Permit me also to specially greet President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo, accompanied by her husband Atty. Jose Miguel, who is seated beside President Ramos. President Arroyo named me chief justice, the highest position within her power to grant. But what was not shown in the musicale is that she did so without speaking with me or interviewing me. The post became vacant on December 20, 2005 with the retirement of CJ Hilario G. Davide Jr. and she promptly chose me from a list of five nominees submitted by the Judicial and Bar Council. The following day, as I was delivering a speech in the ballroom of a five-star hotel, someone slipped a piece of paper to me saying, I just heard over radio that you have been appointed Chief Justice by President Arroyo.

Ladies and gentlemen, I immediately froze on the rostrum unable to continue my speech. Forthwith, I descended the stage, avoided the media reporters waiting to interview me, got into my car with Leni, proceeded to our parish church, and on bended knees, fervently thanked the Lord for His bountiful blessings.

My friends, let me now admit that today is not my exact birthday. My exact birthday was on December 7. Today is really the 11th anniversary of my appointment as chief justice by President Arroyo.

After greeting our special guests, let me now thank the diligent people who made possible this grand musicale, Ageless Passion. First, I thank Ryan Cayabyab, probably the greatest living Filipino composer, for magically creating the 18 beautiful songs immortalized tonight. Then, I thank Kristian Jeff Agustin for crafting the lyrics.

Actually, I feel a little awkward that this wonderful musicale, Cardinal Tagle's incomparable invocation, the upcoming TV broadcast and the new book are undertaken during my lifetime. They are probably more fitting memorials for a dead person, to be held during a neurological service or a requiem or a death anniversary. But what can I really do, except to humbly say Maraming salamat po for the undeserved honor.

Many are wondering how at this age I could still serve as a director or adviser in more than a dozen huge corporations and in more than half a dozen foundations, with almost a hundred percent attendance in all meetings and activities; how I could travel abroad about six times a year; wallop tennis and golf balls four times a week, work out in the gym thrice a week, and swing, boogie and tango occasionally.

When I was new in the Supreme Court in 1995, I composed a prayer that I would like to recite here and now: The Lord is my Shepherd. There is nothing I shall want. He has given me more than I deserve, a happy home, a healthy body, a loving wife, accomplished children over whom I no longer worry, a stable career, a chance to serve our people, an opportunity to be remembered longer than my own life. Other than fulfilling my role in the Court, I have no more earth-bound ambition. I live my life with only one consuming passion: on that inevitable day when I will finally knock at the pearly gates, my Lord and Master will open the door, spread his arms and say: Well done on your earthly sojourn. You have passed the test. Welcome home to my everlasting Kingdom!

From the time I composed that prayer in 1995 up to the present, I look back poignantly at my trials and triumphs, victories and defeats, frustrations and exaltations; and, in all of them, I always find my faithful God.

Indeed, I miraculously recovered from premature death as a six-year old during World War II to face you tonight as a recycled octogenarian still walloping golf and tennis balls, and swaying and dancing occasionally. As I contemplate my life and move toward its sunset, I know that God has woven my many pains and gains into a magnificent tapestry showing His mystical presence. Truly, there is one constancy in my unworthy life: the presence, care and providence of my one Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ.

To Him, I dedicate all that I have been, all that I am, and all that I will ever be. To God be the glory!