THREE AI TAKEAWAYS

Date:       2023-11-09

Publisher:  cjpanganiban.com

Source:     https://cjpanganiban.com/three-ai-takeaways1/

Extemporaneous Closing Remarks by retired Chief Justice ARTEMIO V. PANGANIBAN during the Annual Corporate Governance Enhancement Session of the MVP Group of Companies held on November 9, 2023 at the Ballroom of the Makati Shangri-La Hotel.

---

Good noon, ladies & gentlemen! I know I am the obstacle to your lunch, but I've been ordered by the ladies-in-charge, led by the indomitable PLDT Human Resources Boss Gina Ordonez and the multi-awarded emcee Cathy Yap Young (CYY), to deliver the closing remarks. You're all awake! You still know the difference between opening and closing remarks. But let me make it clear that this talk is supposed to be MVP's and I am not a robot of the great MVP… I'm a fake. I am just a lowly AVP… Walang palakpak? When I said MVP you all clapped, but when I said AVP, you didn't clap. That's unfair! As your punishment, I'll prolong my talk, so you won't eat… Now, you're fully awake. Now, I have your full attention.

You know, I made notes with a ballpen while our guest lecturer and the panel of reactors were delivering their pieces. It says "Grand Hyatt" on the ballpen, and we are in Makati Shangri-La. I borrowed this pen from the owner of the Grand Hyatt who is seated beside me, Alfred Ty, over there. Alfred, please take a bow. Thank you, Dr. Max Tegmark. It was a fantastic talk! We learned a lot from you. And so too, from Paco Sandejas. Disclosure – he's the brother of my deceased son-in-law, Thomas Sandejas. I have a son who graduated with Paco from the University of the Philippines, both of them summa cum laude, and both of them finished their PhDs at Stanford University. But the better news for Paco, he's in the Philippines while my son is in the United States.

My friends, on behalf of our Group Chairman MVP, the PLDT Board, and its Governance, Nomination and Sustainability Committee, I thank all of you once again for joining our Annual Governance Learning Session. Throughout each year, the PLDT Board asks us to be constantly aware of what changes in technology, our industries, global markets, and customer preferences are likely to create lasting and profound impact on the way we do business. We strive to learn more, understand better and move to the future with more confidence, optimism, and hope.

Now, let me sum up some key takeaways from the sessions today:

First, let's invest in human intelligence as contradistinguished from artificial intelligence (AI) because artificial intelligence is fake. Human intelligence is real. So, we will invest in all of you, in all your brains. We will just make AI our slave. Yes? Let's invest in local skills and talents; let us not to be empowered only by technology. It's not reliable as we all know, as demonstrated today.

Number two takeaway – let's focus on our customers, our North Star; the purpose of our business – our customers. We must be customer centric. We will use artificial intelligence, native intelligence, Filipino intelligence, PLDT intelligence to serve our customers.

Number three takeaway – take advantage of the collective strength of our group of companies and put them all together for our collective strength. Dr. Max gave us a little bit of an outline of the different companies in our group. Earlier, you heard him talk about PLDT's business, Meralco's business, Maynilad's business, the MPH business. What he, however, did not point out is that we also have the tollways business.

What shape the future will take depends on who takes an active part in shaping it. For this reason, our conversation today is important and timely as it challenges us all to think again: What value does this evolution add to our human interaction? To the exchange of goods and services? How can we wield it to further improve our services and enrich the lives of our customers and other stakeholders? What role will each of our companies, each of our executives, each of our employees, each one of us, play in ensuring that technology is instrumental in keeping our customers' data protected amid more varied data collection, that there is integrity and accountability in transactions, that interactions are cyber-secure, respectful of law and good customs and the spirit of competition that will remain alive in all of us. The challenge, ladies and gentlemen, is immense. The question I pose to each of us here is — Are we up to the challenge? Thank you very much.